QUALITY ASSURANCE DOCUMENT QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy
Arden University's Student Attendance and Engagement Policy is based on
guidelines from the Office for Students, which include standards recognised across
the sector. The policy takes into account the unique needs of Arden students,
including how the cost of living affects their ability to balance study, work, and
social life. It also follows the Framework for Higher Education Qualifications to
ensure academic standards are met and the quality of learning is maintained and
improved.
1. Introduction
1.1. Arden University is committed to providing the highest quality student
experience and a key component of this is promoting and encouraging student
engagement and attendance with all aspects of the learner experience.
Students who engage fully with their studies and make the most of the
opportunities offered by the University are the ones who are most successful.
1.2. This policy outlines the expectations of attendance and engagement for all
students, across all Campus, and modes of learning at Arden University.
1.3. Arden requires students to attend and engage with their learning, be prepared
for all learning opportunities ahead and communicate with their lecturer if they
are not.
1.4 Student attendance and engagement is monitored for the following reasons:
• To aid student retention and progression through the early identification of
students at risk and allow timely academic and personal support
interventions.
• To enable notifications of withdrawals/suspensions to be made on time,
ensuring all stakeholders are informed in a timely manner.
• To meet any requirement to report absences to employers or other
sponsors where they are funding/co-funding programme fees, including
Apprentices in receipt of ESFA funding.
• To comply with the requirements of the Student Loan Company who require
confirmation of attendance on a regular basis for those students who are
in receipt of financial support.
• To comply with visa authorisation and undertake any necessary reporting
to local immigration authorities (where applicable).
Page 1 of 9
QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL & International Students February 2025

2. Definitions
2.1 Attendance: The presence of the student during the scheduled teaching or
learning activity for the entire session (including remote attendance for online,
live sessions).
2.2. Engagement: Active participation by the student with their studies
(attendance or distance-based) and use of resources to support their learning,
including:
• Attendance of scheduled learning and teaching sessions and activities such
as lectures, seminars, tutorials, project and dissertation workshops and
meetings.
• Active contribution to personal and group tutorials, lectures and seminars.
• Use of library facilities and other learning resources.
• Engagement with, and submission of assessment tasks set.
• Attendance at examinations or time-constrained assessment activities.
• Responding in a timely manner to formal communications from the
University, such as letters, emails, text messages and telephone calls.
3. Induction Requirements
3.1 The Induction process is designed to prepare students for study.
3.2 Blended Learning Campus Based Students, including International
Students are also required to attend a face-to-face induction which will take
place in the campus location prior to commencement of the first study
semester.
3.3 Distance Learning and Apprenticeship Students are required to complete
an online induction which will be available up to 6 weeks before the first module
begins. For Apprentices this will be after completion of enrolment.
3.4 Distance Learning and Apprenticeship Students are also required to
attend a live induction session, multiple dates and times will be offered from 4
weeks prior to teaching start and into week 1 of teaching.
3.5 Late enrolments may be accepted up to the start of teaching (Apprenticeship
programmes do not permit late enrolments). Students who are enrolled late
are expected to attend and complete relevant induction activities within 1 week
of their enrolment.
3.6 Blended Learning Campus Based Students, including International
Students who have been approved for late enrolment and who may have
missed all, or part of the campus induction will be briefed/provided copies of
relevant information by Student Support.
Absences are not usually permitted within the induction period as this is a key time
for student onboarding and future success. Students who are unable to attend a class
Page 2 of 9
QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL & International Students February 2025

during the first two weeks of their first semester must engage with their Student
Success Coach and provide evidence as to why they are unable to attend. This may
result in a deferral to a later intake depending on the length of the unauthorised
absence.
4. Attendance and Engagement Requirements
4.1 Arden University recognises the importance of good attendance and expects all
students to attend and engage in all activities relating to all programmes and
modules.
4.2 Blended Learning Campus Based Students, including International
Students are expected to regularly attend timetabled compulsory classroom
sessions (where sessions are scheduled to be in person and are also offered as
online, International Students must attend the in-person activity as online
attendance will not be accepted towards attendance monitoring for visa
compliance).
4.3 Blended Learning Campus Based Students, including International
Students are expected to regularly log in to iLearn to access learning and
assessment materials.
4.4 Blended Learning Campus Based Students, including International
Students are expected to attend campus scheduled assessments
(presentations, exams etc).
4.5 Distance Learning Students are required to complete weekly lessons, weekly
learning activities and contribute to discussion forums.
4.6 Apprenticeship Students are required to attend 6 weekly coaching
sessions, monthly masterclasses and 4 assessment workshop per module of
delivery. Apprentices are expected to evidence learning in every 4-week
period to be compliant under the ESFA funding rules
4.7 All students are expected to complete and submit assessments on time unless
mitigation or a deferral has been approved, please see Arden University Quality
Assurance document QA 41 Exceptional Mitigating Circumstances Affecting
Student Assessment.
4.8 Where any student is required to attend additional sessions in relation to skills
development, they will be expected to attend these sessions which will be
monitored as per point 4.2 to 4.4 above.
4.9 Upon enrolment Distance Learning Students will be asked how many
modules they intend to complete during the academic year, a minimum of 40
credits must be achieved per year or a student will be considered for Academic
Withdrawal, please see Arden University Withdrawal Policy. If a Distance
Learning Student does not maintain their intended study pace, they will be
contacted by the Student Hub team.
Page 3 of 9
QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL & International Students February 2025

4.10 When monitoring Attendance and/or Engagement the following will be
considered:
• Overall percentage attendance at compulsory timetabled classes since the
start of the programme.
• Percentage weekly attendance at compulsory timetabled classes (to
include current week and preceding four weeks)
• Consecutive absences from compulsory timetabled classes
• Four-weekly Engagement for online students
• Online students’ interaction and participation in programme-specific
learning activities
4.11 Students with low levels of Attendance and/or Engagement will be contacted to
ascertain any reasons for this and to ensure that any need for additional support
is considered. Such reasons may lead the University to implement its Fitness
to Study policy.
4.12 Where Attendance and/or Engagement requirements are specified by the
relevant Professional Statutory and Regulatory Body (PSRB), students are
expected to comply with these requirements, which are published in the
relevant Assessment and Award Regulations.
4.13 The University recognises that it may be necessary to make reasonable
allowances and/or adjustments in the case of disability-related low Attendance
and/or Engagement, in line with the Equality Act 2010. Each case will be treated
on its facts and the University will seek to make fair and proportionate decisions
that are in the student’s best interests.
5. Lateness
5.1 Students are expected to be punctual for all timetabled sessions.
5.2 A student will be recorded as late if they arrive 15 minutes after the timetable
start time.
5.3 If a student does not join the class after the break, they will be marked as
absent for that session.
5.4 Students who are consistently late disrupt both their own education and that of
others. Students will be required to attend a meeting with Student
Support/Academic member of staff and may be considered through the
withdrawal policy if their overall attendance levels are impacted by persistent
lateness.
6. Absence
Page 4 of 9
QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL & International Students February 2025

6.1 Arden University appreciates that at times absence will be necessary due to
unforeseen circumstances, for example illness, medical appointment, visa
appointment, police registration (this list is not exhaustive).
6.2 Students should email the Attendance Team – attendance@arden.ac.uk
Apprenticeship students should email apprenticesupport@arden.ac.uk) as soon
as possible before or on the day of the absence.
6.3 For the first 7 days of your absence, we operate a self-certification process.
Students are expected to catch up on work that has been missed. Any absence
over 7 days requires formal evidence and should not be considered as
authorised until this has been confirmed in writing. If you are given staged
warnings at any time over your attendance, then we may require you to provide
evidence for all absences.
6.4 Holidays during timetabled teaching weeks and assessment periods (including
reassessment periods where applicable) are not permitted (this does not apply
to Apprenticeship Students).
6.5 Extensive or persistent absence affects a student’s ability to continue studying
and may result in withdrawal from the programme and notification to employer,
sponsor, SLC and Visa authorities. Should an absence span more than 3 weeks
(eg; 1 week Self Cert plus 2 week Fit Note), students will be referred to
Wellbeing Services who will ascertain if your illness constitutes a disability
under The Equality Act (2010) and, if so, discuss reasonable adjustments and
support. For further information please refer to the Disability and Reasonable
Adjustments Policy. Absence beyond 3 weeks will only be approved following a
meeting with a Wellbeing Advisor.
For long term absence, beyond 5 weeks, a Fitness to Study Panel may be
convened which may result in a forced Break in Learning, a transfer to another
mode of study or withdrawal.
7. Extenuating Circumstances/Break in Learning
7.1 Extenuating Circumstances is the process by which allowance is made for any
matter or circumstance which may seriously affect a student’s performance in
assessment. Extenuating circumstances must have had a seriously adverse
effect on the student’s performance and have been unanticipated and beyond
the student’s control. Students should refer to the QA 41 Extenuating
Circumstances Affecting Student Assessment and consult with Student Hub
Advisors.
7.2 A Break in Learning allows a student to temporarily suspend their studies for a
specified period to avoid withdrawing due to challenging personal reasons which
have a substantial impact on their ability to study (including, but not limited to
medical, maternity, personal issues or financial issues). Students should refer
to the Arden University Quality Assurance Document QA 75 Break in Learning
and seek guidance from Student Hub Advisors.
Page 5 of 9
QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL & International Students February 2025

7.3 For International Students who are considering applying for a Break in
Learning, they must also seek advice from the International Student
Compliance team to understand the impact to their visa. An absence of any
kind can impact on a student’s visa and their right to remain in the country
whilst not studying. Additionally, any Break in Learning or Mitigation which
extends a student’s anticipated length of study should be considered within the
terms of the student’s visa.
8. Timetable Change Requests
8.1 A Timetable Change Request can be submitted by a student who is in their
second semester and beyond.
8.2 A Timetable Change Request will only be considered in exceptional
circumstances, see below:
• Change to Medical Conditions or Disability that impacts your ability to
access the timetabled in-Campus teaching
• A sudden or unforeseen change to personal commitments and/or
arrangements
• A Safeguarding concern – a sudden or unforeseen circumstance that
poses a risk to harm, exploitation, or abuse
Examples of suitable evidence could include:
• Medical Evidence (could be submitted by a member of Wellbeing
Services on the student’s behalf)
• Statements from responsible third parties on headed & signed paper
• Formal submission of concern from a member of university staff,
following a Safeguarding concern
8.3 All students must also provide supporting evidence to confirm the reason for
their Timetable Change Request (except in the case of a Safeguarding issue,
whereby a member of staff may provide evidence/statement on the student’s
behalf) – any requests that fall out of the above or do not have supporting
evidence, will not be considered. There is no route of appeal to this decision.
8.4 Students will be expected to submit their request to the Lead Student Hub
Advisor at their campus, via a Microsoft form (following the process of
Applicant Timetable Reasonable Adjustment), who will review their case with
the Campus Manager and confirm if the change is accepted or rejected.
8.5 Any approved requests will be implemented at the start of the next full
Semester unless it is deemed appropriate to action for immediate change
(which will be assessed by the Campus Manager or Team Leader).
9. Monitoring and Recording
Page 6 of 9
QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL & International Students February 2025

9.1 Attendance at timetabled sessions will be recorded and monitored. Module
Lecturers will record attendance in a register at all sessions. This will enable
analysis and oversight of individual student attendance at both module level
and overall programme level.
9.2 Formative and summative assessment submission, including examination
attendance and time-controlled assessment engagement (where applicable)
will be monitored.
9.3 Online engagement will be recorded and monitored.
9.4 Data will be analysed and monitored by staff. It is expected that academic
members of staff will also benefit from this information which will enable them
to make positive steps towards absenteeism.
9.5 All student attendance and engagement will be monitored during a teaching
semester, any student whose attendance is a concern will be sent a notification
and this will be logged on the student’s record.
9.6 Any UK Student Route sponsored student who is absent without contact for
10 days and fails to respond to contact from the University will be reported to
the relevant Visa Authority which may result in the student’s visa being
cancelled.
10. Unsatisfactory Attendance and Engagement
10.1 During the first two weeks of a student’s first semester, Blended Learning
Campus Based Students including all International Students, are expected
to have completed the following actions to demonstrate their engagement:
• Student is enrolled and registered.
• Student has completed online induction.
• Student has engaged online completing lessons, activities and
participating in discussion forums.
• Student has attended in person induction.
• Student has paid or has approved student finance funding in place for
study.
• Student attendance at compulsory scheduled sessions.
10.2 During the first two weeks of a student’s first semester, Distance Learning
Students are expected to have completed the following actions to demonstrate
their engagement:
• Student is enrolled and registered.
• Student has completed online induction.
• Student has engaged online, completing lessons, activities and released
their first module.
• Student has attended a live Induction.
Page 7 of 9
QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL & International Students February 2025

• Student has a payment plan in place or has approved student finance
funding.
10.3 Prior to the first week of a student’s first semester, Apprenticeship Students
are expected to have completed the following actions to demonstrate their
engagement:
• Student is enrolled and registered.
• Student has completed apprenticeship online induction.
• Student has engaged online completing lessons, activities and have had
their first module released.
• Student has completed a SWOT analysis.
10.4 For Blended Learning Campus Based Students and Distance Learning
Students, failure to complete these actions will result in Student Hub
contacting students to discuss the situation and based on that interaction the
student may be considered for Early Withdrawal or deferral to a future intake
in accordance with the Arden Withdrawal Policy.
10.5 From week 3 of a student’s enrolment, all students including Distance
Learning Students, International Students and Distance Learning
Students will be monitored to ensure that they are maintaining the following
attendance and engagement expectations:
• The student is regularly attending at the compulsory sessions.
• Key engagement indicators are maintained
• The student submits scheduled assessments or attends a scheduled
Examination or Time Controlled Assessment.
• The student is timely in their attendance i.e. is not persistently late.
10.6 If a student is reported to be a concern due to not meeting the above
attendance and engagement requirements, the Student Hub will attempt to
contact the student to discuss the issue and agree arrangements for adequate
participation.
10.7 Where a student does not respond to contact from the Student Hub, or they
fail to meet the expectations for participation as agreed with the Student Hub
Advisor in 9.6, they will be considered for Attendance and Engagement
Withdrawal in accordance with the Arden Withdrawal Policy.
10.8 A withdrawal decision concerning international students will be communicated
to the relevant immigration authorities. This will most likely result in the
termination of their right to reside in the respective country.
Page 8 of 9
QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL & International Students February 2025

Policy Name: Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL &
International Students
Policy Reference: QA88
Approval Authority: Academic Framework, Regulation and Policy
Committee
Last Approved: February 2025
Responsible SMT Lead: PVC Student Experience
Responsible Department: Student Experience
Policy Contact: James Jennings, Student Persistence Manager
Review Frequency: 3 years
Page 9 of 9
QA 88 Attendance and Engagement Policy BL, DL & International Students February 2025