QA 73 – Fitness to Study Policy
Purpose and scope of the policy
The Fitness to Study policy addresses concerns that a student’s health is jeopardising their
studies or the studies of others. The term “fitness to study” as used in this policy
encompasses all aspects of university life, including engagement with peers and University
staff on Campus and through Distance Learning media. The University seeks to maintain
a safe learning environment which is conducive to the well-being, academic and personal
development of all.
The policy outlines the scope of options available to support the student to continue studies
through an appropriate mode and with an agreed level of support, or to take a Leave of
Absence until Fitness to Study is reviewed.
In rare circumstances when it is apparent that a student is not able to identify a
deterioration in their health or well-being, the University will intervene to ensure the safety
and environment for staff and students. The Fitness to Study policy may be used in cases
where a health condition has not been diagnosed or when the University has not been
notified of the diagnosis. As a range of support services are available to students, this
policy will only be implemented in cases of a serious nature and when other support
systems have been unable to bring resolution according to the Cause for Concern
procedure.
The Fitness to Study Policy is underpinned by the following principles:
• The University will act in a fair and proportionate manner when dealing with
vulnerable individuals;
• The University will act to safeguard the individual student and the wider University
community;
• The University will comply with legal duties and responsibilities;
• The University will consider the impact of any breaks in study and provide advice,
information and guidance for students concerned.
This policy complements the Student Conduct and Disciplinary Procedure and the
Safeguarding Policy.
Support for students in the process
Students may be accompanied to the Fitness to Study Panel by a friend, family member,
a Health and Social Care professional or Student Representative. Students are required to
inform the panel of anyone who will be accompanying them. Any other representative
(such as a Legal Adviser) would not usually be allowed without express advance
permission.
Confidentiality
When the Fitness to Study Policy is invoked the University will take account of the rights
of the student under the Equalities Act and the Data Protection Act. Staff will act with
regard for the expectation of an appropriate level of student confidentiality. Any personal
information that is disclosed will be handled and stored as sensitive data. When consent
is not given, this decision will be respected with the exception of certain circumstances:
• When the student’s mental health has deteriorated to the extent of threatening
his/her personal safety;
• When the student is at risk of serious abuse or exploitation;
• When the student’s behaviour is adversely affecting the rights and safety of others;
QA 73 Fitness to Study
Version 2
Mar 2020

• Where the member of staff would be liable to civil or criminal procedure if the
information were not disclosed (e.g. if a crime had been committed);
• Where the student is either under 18 years or a vulnerable adult (see University
Safeguarding Policy).
Staff should first consult with the Lead Safeguarding Officer if they believe there is a need
to break the commitment to confidentiality. Initial discussion should not identify the
student until the grounds for breaking confidentiality have been established and agreed
upon.
STAGE 1:
Beginning the process: referral made through the application of the Cause for Concern
Policy. Officer making referral should submit a chronological overview of evidence in
support of the escalation of the issue surrounding the student. conversation between
student and one of HoCO/SSM to discuss concerns and agree forward action. This
discussion will be supportive in nature and will communicate to the student the precise
nature of the behaviour that has caused concern to have been raised. The student will
present any mitigating circumstances and, where appropriate, an action plan may be
agreed with set dates for review. A letter outlining the conversation and agreements
should be sent to the student within 5 working days.
At the end of the review period, the case should be reviewed to assess if the actions have
been effective. If there are no further concerns, the student is able to continue with their
studies. If concerns remain, then Stage 2 of the policy should be implemented.
STAGE 2:
Where a Stage 1 meeting has not been successful, or the student has not implemented
the action plan or their behaviour provides serious grounds for concern, a formal review
meeting would be convened. Behaviour that would trigger this level of concern includes:
• Continuous complaints from other students/staff about concerning behaviour;
• A significant concern for academic achievement;
• Where the student refuses to access support or demonstrates strange behaviour
that gives cause for concern e.g. withdrawal from interaction, missed
appointments, poor attendance.
The meeting would be convened by the Pro Vice Chancellor (Student Experience) and
include a Programme Team Leader and a Quality Team Leader and in the case of a student
visa route student an International Student Adviser
The student shall be given reasonable written notice of the meeting. The letter or email
shall inform the student:
• of the meeting under the Fitness to Study Policy and the nature of the meeting is
supportive;
• of the purpose of the meeting and request any necessary detailed information and
documentation including, if appropriate, medical evidence;
• that they can be accompanied by a friend/supporter/representative.
The meeting will proceed even if the student declines to attend and a decision will be made
as to the most positive solution. The meeting will ensure that the student has opportunity
to be heard, and to present any evidence in support of their case. The meeting will also
ensure that the University acts in the best interests for the wellbeing and academic
QA 73 Fitness to Study
Version 2
Mar 2020

progress of the student and other parties concerned. The student will agree steps forward
and likely outcomes if concerns persist.
Outcomes may include:
• withdrawal;
• Enforced Leave of Absence for an agreed time frame;
• Change of study mode;
• Change of study intensity;
• Referral to other procedures;
• Continuation of studies with agreed action plan;
• Escalation to Stage 3 if the student refuses to accept the outcome.
A written record will be produced outlining the outcome of the meeting and retained in a
confidential location. Any action plan will specify desired behaviour, expectations and
agreed support structures to be reviewed at a specified deadline. The action plan may
also request medical evidence of fitness to study.
STAGE 3
The Registrar, or nominee, will chair the Fitness to Study Panel to ensure a conclusion is
reached.
Serious circumstances may warrant the procedure to start at Stage 3. If a student has
been suspended through the Student Disciplinary Procedure or Prevent, they Fitness to
Study will begin at Stage 3.
The initiation of Stage 3 will be the decision of the Pro Vice Chancellor (Student Experience)
in consultation with the relevant Head of School. The panel will include:
• Pro Vice Chancellor (Student Experience);
• Head of School;
• Registrar;
• The student, who may be accompanied by a friend, family member, relevant
professional.
(Students should inform the panel of who will accompany them prior to the panel
meeting).
• International Student Adviser where the student is a student visa route student.
The Fitness to Study Panel will decide if a student is required to take a Leave of Absence
for a period of time. Students may be offered a return to study at the beginning of the
next academic year or relevant study block. Information about the ‘Return to Study’
procedure and policy will be provided.
Student Support will provide information, advice and guidance to the student concerned.
A named member of staff will be provided for the student to maintain contact throughout
the pause in studies and with whom the student’s case and circumstances may be reviewed
regarding returning to study. The member of staff will also inform the Student Loans
Company, UKVI, or any other relevant person, of the interruption or withdrawal.
The student may be offered a compulsory alternative of a part-time or Distance Learning
route to completing their studies, where possible.
Outcomes of the Fitness to Study Panel will be confirmed in writing. The student has a
right to appeal against the decision of the Panel. In the case of withdrawal or suspension,
QA 73 Fitness to Study
Version 2
Mar 2020

the student will be given opportunity to discuss implications with a member of the Student
Support Team.
Return to Study
One month before the end of the Leave of Absence, the University will contact the student
to begin discussions about a possible return to study. This is subject to agreement
between Student Support and the relevant academic school and will depend on specific
circumstances and the context of the original concern. In all cases, return to study will
depend on:
• Medical evidence of fitness to study provided by a recognised health professional
that has sufficient knowledge of the student’s medical situation and the concerns
that led to the Leave of Absence;
• An assessment of need undertaken by the Head of Campus Operations (Blended
Learning) or Student Support Manager (Distance Learning) to determine additional
support requirements and if they can be provided.
• Visa conditions.
The Head of Campus Operations or Student Support Manager is responsible for informing
the Fitness to Study Panel of the decision to permit a return to study. They should also
ensure that the student is supported in putting relevant financial and support
arrangements in place.
Medical Evidence should state:
• Any medical condition from which the student may be suffering;
• The extent of impact on his/her fitness to study and cope with student life;
• Any impact or risk to others;
• Any reasonable adjustments that they University should consider implementing;
• Whether the student will be receiving on-going medical treatment or support.
If medical evidence is not provided, the University will make a decision based on available
information or may decide to address the issue under an alternative policy, such as
Student Conduct and Disciplinary.
Medical evidence will be one factor considered within the decision of Return to Study – all
available evidence will be considered.
If concerns remain about the suitability of a Return to Study, the decision should be re-
referred to Stage 3.
Right of Appeal
The student has a right to appeal to the Vice-Chancellor or nominee within 10 working
days, outlining the grounds for the appeal. The Vice-chancellor or nominee shall consider
the appeal and decide whether to amend or uphold the decision. This decision will be final.
If the student remains dissatisfied with the outcome, they may approach the Office of the
Independent Adjudicator within three months of the conclusion of University procedures.
They should enclose a copy of the University’s final decision and state the reasons for
applying to the Higher Education Independent Adjudicator for assistance.
OIA
Third Floor, Kings Reach
38-50 King’s Road
QA 73 Fitness to Study
Version 2
Mar 2020

Reading
RG1 3AA
Email enquiries: enquiries@oiahe.org.uk
Website: www.oiahe.org.uk
Policy Name: Fitness to Study Policy
Policy Reference: QA73
Approval Authority: Students, Quality and Standards Committee
Last Approved: March 2020
Responsible SMT Lead: Academic Registrar
Responsible Department: Academic Affairs
Policy Contact: Jo Walker, Head of Quality
(jwalker@arden.ac.uk)
Review Frequency: 3 years
QA 73 Fitness to Study
Version 2
Mar 2020