ARDEN UNIVERSITY QUALITY ASSURANCE DOCUMENT QA 66 ŌĆō WITHDRAWAL POLICY
Introduc’┐Įon
1.1. Arden University is commited to providing the highest quality student experience.
However, there are circumstances upon which students may decide to withdraw or where
the University may need to withdraw students from their programme.
1.2. This policy sets out all types of withdrawals and the process that must be followed by staff
and students in managing withdrawals:
ŌĆó Student self-withdrawal
ŌĆó Early withdrawal
ŌĆó Atendance and engagement withdrawal (Including students who fail to re-enrol)
ŌĆó Financial withdrawal
ŌĆó Disciplinary withdrawal
ŌĆó Academic withdrawal
ŌĆó Immigra’┐Įon withdrawal
1.3 Where there are differences in this policy rela’┐Įng to withdrawals for different student types at
Arden University, these have been specified by sta’┐Įng Blended Learning Campus Based
Students which refers to students who atend one of the UniversityŌĆÖs campuses for in person
teaching, and students studying via one of our partner ins’┐Įtu’┐Įons. Interna’┐Įonal Student
refers to students who have been sponsored by Arden University to enter the country and
atend in person teaching on a full-’┐Įme course and who must meet addi’┐Įonal requirements
as part of the terms of their visa. Distance Learning Student refers to students who have
enrolled to complete a course online and on a remote basis. Where there is no difference the
term ŌĆśstudentŌĆÖ encompasses all the above.
Student self-withdrawal
2.1. Students will normally follow an agreed mode of atendance, however if a studentŌĆÖs
circumstances change and they are unable to con’┐Įnue atending for a period, they should
consider taking a break in learning. A break in learning allows a student to take a break from
their programme for up to 12 months. Students should refer to the Arden University Quality
Assurance Document QA 75 Break in Learning and seek guidance from Student Hub Advisors.
2.2. If a break in learning is not a suitable op’┐Įon, and where a student has decided a’┐Įer being
coached by either an Arden University staff member or a member of staff at a partner
ins’┐Įtu’┐Įon, that they can no longer con’┐Įnue their programme of study, they can request to
withdraw via the Arden University Student Portal. Students should read the Arden
University Terms and Condi’┐Įons and the Arden University Refund Policy when comple’┐Įng
the withdrawal request. The date of self-withdrawal will be 14 days from the date that a
student submits their withdrawal request to Arden University, or on the date that the
withdrawal is processed, whichever comes first. Any student may withdraw from their
studies at the University at any point in the year. However, a student may not voluntarily
withdraw a’┐Įer the University has decided to exclude the student or if the student is under
the disciplinary/fitness to prac’┐Įce process.

2.3. An Interna’┐Įonal Student who is on a student visa/permit route to study at Arden
University, will need to meet with the Immigra’┐Įon Compliance Team to ensure that they
fully understand the impact of withdrawal on their right to remain in the country.
2.4. A withdrawal will not normally be backdated. Should a student wish to request a backdated
withdrawal, they will need to set out their reasons for not reques’┐Įng the withdrawal sooner
in the withdrawal request. Any decision to agree a backdated withdrawal must be agreed by
the Academic Registrar.
2.5. The student will receive confirma’┐Įon of their withdrawal by email. The communica’┐Įon will
contain the date from which the withdrawal applies as per 2.2 above. Any work submited
by the student prior to their date of withdrawal will be marked and considered at the next
available Progression and Award Board. The student will be considered for any fall-back
award due, and any credit accrued will be awarded. The student will be no’┐Įfied of the
outcome of the Progression and Award Board and will have the right to appeal.
2.6. If the student wishes to re-join the University, whether studying on the same or a different
programme, they will need to reapply. Where relevant, and in line with our Academic
Regula’┐Įons, recogni’┐Įon of any credit atained during their previous study may be taken into
considera’┐Įon. The decision to readmit will be made by the Admissions team, applying the
relevant entry criteria for the course to which the student has applied.
2.7. If a self-withdrawal is approved, finance will assess a studentŌĆÖs eligibility of a refund in line
with our refund policy.
Early withdrawal (Milestones)
3.1. Arden University reserves the right to withdraw a student during the first two weeks of
enrolment if a student has not completed expected atendance and engagement
expecta’┐Įons as per the Arden QA88 Student Atendance and Engagement Policy and QA100
Student Atendance and Engagement Procedure
3.2. Student Hub Advisors will contact the student to offer support and advise that failure to
meet the above condi’┐Įons in the first two weeks of the programme start, will result in
withdrawal from the programme.
3.3. Where extenua’┐Įng circumstances are iden’┐Įfied, the student will be advised to refer to
Arden University QA 41 Extenua’┐Įng Circumstances and Arden University QA 75 Break in
Learning and seek guidance from Student Hub Advisors.
3.5 For Interna’┐Įonal Students who are considering applying for a Break in Learning, they must
also seek advice from the Interna’┐Įonal Student Compliance team to understand the impact
to their visa/permit. An absence of any kind can impact on a studentŌĆÖs visa and their right to
remain in the country whilst not studying. Addi’┐Įonally, any Break in Learning or Mi’┐Įga’┐Įon
which extends a studentŌĆÖs an’┐Įcipated length of study should be considered within the
terms of the studentŌĆÖs visa/permit.

3.6 The student persistence team will prepare a list of students who have not met expected
atendance and engagement expecta’┐Įons during the first 2 weeks of enrolment. The list will
be considered by Pro Vice Chancellor for Student Experience or nominee. Where a decision
concerns an Interna’┐Įonal Student on a student visa, the Head of Interna’┐Įonal Student
Compliance will also be consulted. If all par’┐Įes agree, the student will be withdrawn as an
ŌĆśearly withdrawalŌĆÖ.
3.7 Students will be no’┐Įfied in wri’┐Įng that they have been withdrawn within five working days
of the date of withdrawal.
3.8 Students who are withdrawn as an ŌĆśearly withdrawalŌĆÖ, have no formal right of appeal.
However, if a student believes that they have been withdrawn in error, they may lodge a
complaint following the Arden University QA 48 Students Complaint Procedure.
Atendance and engagement withdrawal
4.1 Arden University is commited to providing the highest quality student experience and a key
component of this is promo’┐Įng and encouraging student atendance and engagement with
all aspects of the learner experience. Student atendance and engagement is monitored for
the following reasons:
ŌĆó To aid student reten’┐Įon and progression, through the early iden’┐Įfica’┐Įon of students at
risk and allow ’┐Įmely academic and personal support interven’┐Įons.
ŌĆó To enable no’┐Įfica’┐Įons of withdrawals/suspensions to be made on ’┐Įme ensuring all
stakeholders are informed in a ’┐Įmely manner.
ŌĆó To meet any requirement to report absences to employers or other sponsors where they
are funding/co-funding programme fees, including Appren’┐Įces in receipt of ESFA funding.
ŌĆó To comply with the requirements of the Student Loan Company who require confirma’┐Įon
of atendance on a regular basis for those students who are in receipt of financial support.
ŌĆó To comply with visa1regula’┐Įons and undertake any necessary repor’┐Įng to local
immigra’┐Įon authori’┐Įes (where applicable).
4.2. Where a student has failed to meet the required atendance and engagement requirements
as set out in the QA100 Student Atendance and Engagement Procedure, the Student
Persistence Manager will make a recommenda’┐Įon to the Pro Vice Chancellor for Student
Experience to approve the withdrawal of a student. The Registry team will process approved
withdrawals within 7 days and confirm the last date of atendance as the date the approval
for withdrawal was confirmed.
4.3. Students are required to complete re-enrolment every 12 months, or at a point of
progression, whichever is soonest. Blended Learning Campus Based Students who fail to re-
enrol by the given deadline will be withdrawn. The date of withdrawal will be confirmed as
1 Where Visa is referred to throughout this document it applies to students on Student Visa issued and
regulated by UKVI and students in Berlin on a Student Visa/residence permit issued and regulated by German
Immigra’┐Įon Authority.

the deadline for re-enrolment. Distance Learning Students who fail to re-enrol by the given
deadline, will be placed on a forced break in learning for up to 12 months. If the student has
not requested a return from break in learning within the 12 month period, they will be
withdrawn. The date for withdrawal will be confirmed as the end date of the break in
learning period.
Financial Withdrawal
5.1. It is a studentŌĆÖs responsibility to ensure that they have their finances in place and that they
can meet the costs of their fees before enrolling as set out in the Course Fee Payment Policy.
5.2. If any student has not met their financial responsibili’┐Įes to Arden University as outlined in
the Course Fee Payment Policy, and if they are confirmed as a student debtor, finance will
make a recommenda’┐Įon to the Chief Financial Officer to approve the withdrawal of the
student. The Registry team will process approved withdrawals within 7 days and confirm the
last date of atendance as the date the approval for withdrawal was confirmed.
Disciplinary withdrawal
6.1. If a Student Discipline Commitee recommends that a student should be excluded, in
accordance with the Student Disciplinary Procedure (QA60), the Registry Team will process
the students withdrawal within 7 days and confirm the last date of atendance as the date
the approval for withdrawal was confirmed.
6.2. Where an Academic Misconduct Panel confirms a case of Academic Misconduct and
determines a penalty of exclusion, the student will be presented to the next Progression and
Awards Board for withdrawal. The date of withdrawal will be confirmed as the date of the
Progression and Award Board.
Academic withdrawal
7.1. During a Progression and Award Board, students may be considered for academic
withdrawal in line with Arden UniversityŌĆÖs Regulatory Framework. In summary the grounds
for Academic Withdrawal are:
7.1.1. Where a student has not achieved a pass mark following the maximum number of
referrals or re-takes available and is not eligible for compensa’┐Įon. Such students will
be withdrawn and awarded any exit award for which they are eligible.
7.1.2. Where a student has not demonstrated sufficient achievement or engagement to be
offered a retake opportunity.
7.1.3. Where a student has failed to make ’┐Įmely progress through the programme and they
will not be able to complete within the maximum study period for the programme.
Immigra’┐Įon Withdrawal

8.1. The University reserves the right to withdraw any student who fails to respond to official
communica’┐Įons reques’┐Įng updates or documenta’┐Įon related to their visa or immigra’┐Įon
status. This includes, but is not limited to, requests for confirma’┐Įon of visa renewal, proof of
legal status, or clarifica’┐Įon of immigra’┐Įon-related concerns.
8.2. Failure to respond may result in the assump’┐Įon that the student is no longer ac’┐Įvely
pursuing their studies or maintaining valid immigra’┐Įon status. In such cases, the University
will:
8.2.1. Ini’┐Įate withdrawal procedures
8.2.2. Where applicable, report any sponsored students to the relevant immigra’┐Įon
authori’┐Įes who will typically curtail/cancel the studentŌĆÖs visa or residence permit.
8.2.3. The student will not be eligible to re-instated un’┐Įl they can provide valid immigra’┐Įon
documenta’┐Įon through the official appeals process and receive approval from the
UniversityŌĆÖs Immigra’┐Įon Compliance Team
Appeal
10.1. Any student who has been withdrawn in accordance with this policy, may submit an appeal
against a withdrawal decision made by or on behalf of the Progression and Award Board as
per the Arden University Academic Appeals Process (QA24) .
Policy Name: Withdrawal Policy
Policy Reference: QA66
Approval Authority: Academic Framework, Regula’┐Įon and Policy
Commitee
Last Approved: July 2025
Responsible SMT Lead: Academic Registrar
Responsible Department: Academic Affairs
Policy Contact: Rosella Brennan, Head of Registry Services
(rbrennan@arden.ac.uk)
Review Frequency: 3 years