QUALITY ASSURANCE DOCUMENT QA 24 – ACADEMIC APPEALS PROCEDURE
INTRODUCTION
This procedure sets out the grounds and procedures through which students can make
an academic appeal against the decision of the Subject Assessment Board or Progression
and Award Board. It applies to all Arden University students including those undertaking
an Arden University programme through a collaborative or partnership provider.
ACADEMIC APPEALS
An academic appeal is the process by which a student may request a review of the
decision of the academic body charged with making decisions on student progress,
assessment, and awards. The Subject Assessment Board the academic body is
responsible for confirming assessment marks and the Progression and Awards Board is
responsible for confirming progression and awards.
This procedure does not apply to complaints arising from a student’s educational
experience, academic and/or administrative support, or complaints relating to facilities
or learning resources. In these instances, students should refer to QA - 48 Student
Complaints Procedure.
In some instances, issues raised may fall into both the categories of appeals and
complaints. Where this happens, students will be advised on which specific issues will be
considered under which specific procedure.
GROUNDS FOR APPEAL
1. Arden University will only consider appeals on the following grounds:
1.1 An assessment mark contains an arithmetical or other error of fact
1.2 Defects or irregularities that were not known to the Subject Assessment
Board or Progression and Award Board occurred in the assessment process,
or the assessment, in whatever format, was not conducted in accordance with
current regulation, or some other irregularity has occurred; and such defects
or irregularities are shown to have adversely affected student performance
1.3 There are significant exceptional personal circumstances that seriously
affected a student’s performance in assessment or studies, which were not
known to the Subject Assessment Board or Progression and Award Board.
The student must evidence good reason why circumstances could not be
made known prior to the meeting of the relevant Board.
2

Appeals cannot be made based on disagreement with the academic judgement of the
markers or because a student is unhappy with the mark awarded. Prior to
confirmation by the Subject Assessment Board, assessments go through a robust
system of marking, moderation, and where applicable external examination to check
that marking schemes have been applied correctly and consistently and that the final
marks awarded are fair.

3

Disagreement with the decision of the Progression and Award Board, in reaching a
decision on a student’s progression, or the final level of award based on the marks,

Page 1 of 5
QA 24 Academic Appeals Process v7.1 May 2022

grades and other information relating to a student's performance, cannot in itself
constitute grounds for a request for reconsideration by a student.
4

The acceptance of an award does not limit the student’s right to pursue an appeal within
the provisions of these regulations.

5

The appeals process consists of an informal stage for early resolution, a formal stage,
and a review stage.

INFORMAL STAGE FOR EARLY RESOLUTION
6

The informal stage may be implemented for students who wish to seek clarification on
their grades or discuss concerns before submitting a formal appeal. Early resolution
should be used where it is possible to quickly resolve issues that require minimal
investigation such as clear errors of fact or irregularities that can be quickly and easily
verified to avoid delays in submitting and processing formal appeals.

7

Students that wish to seek clarification on a grade, progression or award decision may
be submit the request to the Lecturer, Module Leader, Programme Team Leader, or a
member of the Student Experience team. This should be done at the earliest opportunity
and no later than 10 working days from receipt of a confirmed grade from the Subject
Assessment Board or Progression and Award Board decision.

8

Where there is clear evidence of an error or irregularity in process that requires minimal
investigation, a request will be made to the relevant departments to address and correct
the issue. Where decisions have been confirmed by the Subject Assessment and/or
Progression and Award Board, the Chair will be informed and asked to approve
corrections and ensure that student records are updated accordingly.

9

Where it is not possible to resolve concerns through early resolution, students will be
notified and may proceed to the formal appeal stage.

FORMAL APPEAL PROCESS
10 Students that wish to submit a formal appeal should complete the Academic Appeal
Form, within 10 working days of receipt of a confirmed grade from the Subject
Assessment Board or Progression and Award Board decision. Assessment marks are
provisional until they have been ratified by the Subject Assessment Board, therefore
formal appeals received prior to this will not be considered. Appeals submitted after the
10-working day deadline, will be deemed to be out of time and will not be considered,
unless clear and substantial evidence is provided to demonstrate why the student was
prevented from submitting the appeal by the deadline. The completed Academic Appeal
Form, available: here must clearly state the grounds for appeal and must be
accompanied by relevant documentary evidence including any communication at the
early resolution stage. If you have any difficulty accessing the appeal form, please
contact the Appeal Team by emailing appeals@arden.ac.uk
11 Once received, the appeal will be allocated to a designated member of the Quality Team
who acknowledge receipt within 5 working days.

Page 2 of 5
QA 24 Academic Appeals Process v7.1 May 2022

12 Exceptionally, a group of students may submit an appeal, for example, where it relates
to a group assessment. To do so, the group should identify one student to act as a
spokesperson who will then act on behalf of the group. The Quality nominee will contact
each named student, to confirm that they wish to be part of the appeal.
13 The Quality nominee will undertake an initial investigation. Where the appeal form is
incomplete, or where there appears to be missing information, the Quality nominee may
contact the student and invite them to provide further information or evidence.
14 Where on initial investigation, an appeal appears to fall outside of the permitted
timescales and grounds for appeal, a letter will be sent to the student to explain the
reasons why the appeal does not meet the criteria. Students will have a further 10
working days if they wish to provide clarification and/or request that the appeal is
reviewed formally.
15 Where appropriate, the Quality nominee may consult with the Chair of the relevant
Subject Assessment Board or Progression and Award Board, or the relevant department
head to obtain evidence of facts relating to the appeal.
16 The Quality nominee will assign the appeal to a senior academic staff member who has
not been involved previously with the matter for consideration. This will normally be the
relevant Head of School or their Deputy. A meeting will be convened to review the appeal
and determine the outcome.
17 The student will be notified in writing of the outcome of the appeal, including any decision
to refer the matter to the relevant Subject Assessment Board or Progression and Award
Board, within 20-working days of receipt of the appeal. Outcomes relating to group
appeals will be issued to the group spokesperson, who is responsible for distributing
the outcome to the other group members.
18 The outcome letter will set out the decision on whether there is a recommendation for
the appeal to be upheld or rejected and will include a clear explanation for the decision
and next steps. Notification of the final decision of the Subject Assessment Board or
Progression and Award Board will be issued by the relevant board.
19 In exceptional cases, if it is not possible to meet these timescales, the student will be
notified in writing of the reason for the delay and a revised timeframe for a response
will be provided.
20 Where applicable, following a successful appeal the Chair or nominee of the Subject
Assessment Board or Progression and Award Board, will take all necessary steps to
ensure the student’s record is amended to reflect the decision of the Subject Assessment
Board or Progression and Award Board. If the outcome of the appeal permits the student
to receive a different classification of degree or if the certificate has been issued, the
student will be required to return the original award certificate before dispatch of the
revised award certificate.
REQUEST FOR REVIEW
21 If a student is not satisfied with the outcome of the Formal Appeal, they may request
a review of the outcome within 10 working days of the written appeal decision.
Requests for review received after this deadline will not normally be considered.

Page 3 of 5
QA 24 Academic Appeals Process v7.1 May 2022

22

A request for review may only be considered on the following grounds:
•
•

There is evidence of procedural irregularity at the Formal Appeal stage
There is new material information available which, for valid reasons, was
not provided earlier in the process.

23

A Stage Two Appeal Review form, available here should be completed and
submitted within ten working days of dispatch of the Formal Appeal outcome letter.
If you have any difficulty accessing the appeal form, please contact the Appeal Team
by emailing appeals@arden.ac.uk.

24

Students should include full details on the grounds on which the review is being
requested and indicate within their correspondence why the outcome of the Formal
Appeal was not satisfactory.

25

The Quality nominee will acknowledge receipt of the request within five working
days.

26

The Quality nominee will undertake an initial evaluation to check that the request
has been submitted within the appropriate timescales, meets the criteria and is in
the required format with includes supporting evidence where applicable.

27

The Quality nominee will convene a review panel to consider the concerns raised.
This will be two senior academic staff members who were not involved in the
consideration of the original academic appeal. Reviewers will be supported by the
Head of Quality or nominee.

28

The reviewer may request additional information or evidence from the student, in
which case the student will be notified in writing and given at least five working
days to respond.

29

The outcomes available are as follows:
•
•

That the appeal be upheld in whole or in part and a resolution offered
That the appeal be rejected

30

The student will be notified in writing of the outcome of the review within 20 working
days of receipt of the original review request. The decision of the Stage 2 Review
outcome is final, and a Completion of Procedures letter will be issued including details
of the students right to appeal to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher
Education (OIA) (see section 24).

31

In the event of an appeal being upheld whole or in part, recommendations should be
made in respect of remedial action required. A report on the matter and any actions
arising will be referred to the next meeting of the Quality and Standards Committee.

INDEPENDENT ADJUDICATION
32

Students who have been issued with a Completion of Procedures letter may seek
review by the Office for the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA) if
they remain dissatisfied with the University’s final decision, providing the complaint
is eligible under the OIA’s rules of the complaints scheme as detailed on their website

Page 4 of 5
QA 24 Academic Appeals Process v7.1 May 2022

http://www.oiahe.org.uk/. Complaints must be made within 12 months of the date
of the Completion of Procedures letter.
Policy Name:
Policy Reference:
Approval Authority:
Last Approved:
Responsible SMT Lead:
Responsible Department:
Policy Contact:
Review Frequency:

Academic Appeals Procedure
QA 24
Quality and Standards Committee
May 2022
Academic Registrar
Academic Affairs
Jo Walker, Head of Quality jwalker@arden.ac.uk
3 years

Page 5 of 5
QA 24 Academic Appeals Process v7.1 May 2022

