QUALITY ASSURANCE DOCUMENT QA 81 – DISABILITY AND REASONABLE
ADJUSTMENTS POLICY
Policy Statement
Throughout this document the word disability will be used to describe students with
a disability as described in the Equality Act (2010) this includes:
• Students with long term physical and mental health conditions
• Students with sensory and or physical impairments
• Students with neurodiversities such as dyslexia, dyspraxia, autism, ADHD
Providing access to education and learning to a wide and diverse body of students is an
integral principle of Arden University’s operating ethos. Its modes of delivering higher
education are designed with the diverse needs of students in mind and to provide
students with flexibility and choice to help overcome some of the barriers they may face
to learning. The University also recognises that individual students may have specific
disabilities that may require additional support and reasonable adjustments to be made.
This policy sets out the principles by which reasonable adjustments will be made in
dialogue and consultation with the student.
Arden University is committed to dealing in a fair and considerate manner with disabled
students and where possible make reasonable adjustments to its operating procedures,
whilst maintaining the integrity of the academic standards and quality of the
qualifications it offers.
Students who would like reasonable adjustments, can make their disability known by the
following means: at the point of application; during the annual registration task; to
Student Support or the Inclusion team this may be before study commences or at any
point in their studies. Arden’s Inclusion team (student disability) will assess the
student’s needs and the implications for study. Where appropriate, evidence may be
required to support a request for reasonable adjustments.
1. Reasonable adjustments to Assessment
Reasonable adjustments to assessments will be assessed on an individual basis, based on
individual need, and may include, but are not limited to:
1. Extra time in Time constrained assessments (TCAs) and Multiple-Choice
questionnaires (MCQs)
2. Exam arrangements
3. Alternative assessments
4. Pre-approved 7-day extensions
1.1 Extra time in TCAs and MCQs
Students with disabilities may request support for scheduled TCAs and MCQs by emailing
the Inclusion team on Inclusion@arden.ac.uk. The Inclusion team will also email all
Page 1 of 4

students with a declared disability before an upcoming MCQ or TCA to ask if adjustments
are required.
Requests for extra time should be made at the earliest opportunity be made by or at
least 4 weeks before the MCQ or TCA is scheduled to run. Any request received and
approved later than this date, may permit the student to mitigate the attempt for that
block and allow the extra time arrangements to be implemented for the following block.
See point 3 on Extenuating circumstances below.
Where a TCA is usually open for 24 hours, the maximum extra time permitted will be
one hundred percent equating to 24 extra hours.
Where an MCQ is scheduled to take 60 minutes and the time open for the student to
access is 8 hours, the maximum extra time permitted will be based on an approved
percentage of the scheduled time, for example 25% extra time will permit the student to
have a total of 75 minutes to take the MCQ during the 8-hour window.
1.2 Alternative assessments
Students who require alternative assessments may request these by contacting the
Inclusion team on Inclusion@arden.ac.uk. Inclusion advisers will make detailed
recommendations and liaise with PTL for academic input with the approval for the
alternative assessment to be approved by the Student Affairs Committee.
Unprecedented requests may be escalated to the relevant Professional, Statutory and
Regulatory Bodies (PSRBs) where an adjustment may be seen to contradict the learning
outcomes/competence standards.
1.3 Pre-approved 7-day extensions
Students with a declared disability may be recommended pre-approved 7-day
extensions. These do not require the usual process as outlined in the Extensions Policy.
These extensions can be approved by an Inclusion adviser and or a Success Coach or
Support Champion without the need for the student to submit a request form.
Extensions may also be provided to students who are awaiting evidence as a temporary
adjustment.
2. Sharing disability data and reasonable adjustments to teaching and
learning
Students who would like to share their disability and potential learning barriers with their
academic team can request this by contacting the Inclusion team on
Inclusion@arden.ac.uk Inclusion advisers (student disability) will make detailed
recommendations for teaching and learning adjustments and share these with academics
via the PowerBI reasonable adjustment report.
3. Extenuating Circumstances Affecting Student Assessment
Should circumstances arise that have a serious adverse effect on a disabled student’s
performance, which are unanticipated and beyond the student’s control such as
worsening of conditions which means that reasonable adjustments made to assessments
Page 2 of 4

are not sufficient. The student should follow the QA41 Extenuating Circumstances
Affecting Student Assessment process. If the Inclusion team have medical evidence on
file, they can provide essential details to support the extenuating circumstances request.
New evidence will not be requested for fluctuating conditions.
Extenuating circumstances forms are available within the A-Z section on iLearn or from
the Student Support and Inclusion teams. Students are strongly recommended to ensure
that claims for extenuating circumstances are submitted to a member of the Student
Support, success coach or Inclusion team for an initial check prior to formal
consideration. All claims for extenuating circumstances are considered by the Student
Affairs Committee in confidence.
4. Break in Learning Policy
Should more longer-term medical conditions or bouts of issues from an existing disability
occur, for which reasonable adjustments are not sufficient students can temporarily
suspend their studies for a specified period of up to a maximum of 12 months through
the QA75 Break in Learning Policy. Breaks in learning cannot be backdated so students
are advised to contact their Student Support Co-ordinator at the earliest opportunity.
A break in learning form should be submitted to the Student Support Co-ordinator in the
first instance, evidence is not required. Break in Learning requests are considered by
the relevant Programme Team Leader with the outcome communicated by the Student
Support team.
A break in learning may have implications for progression, study intensity, student
finance and other issues which are outside of Arden University’s control.
5. Other support for Disabled Students
Disabled students who would like access to support whilst studying may be entitled to:
1. A fully funded initial diagnostic assessment of an SpLD including ADHD and
autism
2. £200 contribution towards the cost of DSA equipment
3. Non-medical helper (NMH) support not provided through DSAs
5.1 Students who think they may have an SpLD but do not have any evidence should
contact Inclusion@arden.ac.uk to begin the screening process.
5.2 Students in receipt of DSAs but are not able to meet the costs of the £200
contribution for equipment can apply for help towards this through the Arden
Blackbullion Hardship funds Financial Support Bursary Scheme | Wellbeing Portal
(arden.ac.uk)
5.3 Students who require Non-medical helper support but cannot access this through
DSAs may be eligible to this via University funded support and should contact
Inclusion@arden.ac.uk who will make an assessment and recommendations for support.
Eligibility:
Page 3 of 4

To be eligible to apply for disability related support, students must meet the eligibility
criteria for Disabled Students’ Allowances (DSAs) as set out below (extracted from
Student Finance website).
Students with disabilities can apply for Disabled Students’ Allowances (DSAs), for
example of disabilities include:
• Long-term health condition
• Mental health condition
• Sensory or Physical impairment
• Specific learning difficulty like dyslexia or dyspraxia
In order to be eligible students must also:
• Be an undergraduate including foundation year or postgraduate student
• Be studying on a course that lasts at least a year
• Be studying on a course that has at least a 25% course intensity
• For an SpLD assessment students must have gone through a screening
assessment with an Arden Inclusion Adviser
EU or international students are not eligible for DSA from Student Finance England but
may be eligible for University funded support, EU or international students requiring
support should contact Inclusion@arden.ac.uk to enquire.
Policy Name: Disability and Reasonable Adjustments Policy
Policy Reference: QA81
Approval Authority: Students, Quality and Standards Committee
Last Approved: December 2023
Responsible SMT Lead: PVC Student Experience
Responsible Department: Student Experience
Policy Contact: Debbie Groom, Head of Student Success
(dgroom@arden.ac.uk)
Review Frequency: 3 years
Page 4 of 4