Arden University Quality Assurance Document
QA25 Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Policy
1 ARDEN UNIVERSITY’S ETHOS AND COMMITMENT TO
EQUITY, DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION
At Arden University, we celebrate the diversity of our colleagues and students,
and we are committed to ensuring that colleagues, students and other people we
engage with feel empowered and respected, as part of a positive, diverse,
supportive and kind culture. This aligns with our institutional values:
• We want to Stand out in the sector for our inclusive practice
• We are Progressive, driving innovation in EDI
• We are Accessible to our diverse colleagues and students
• We are Resourceful in our EDI partnerships and approaches
• We believe in Kindness in everything we do
We are committed to providing equal opportunities for colleagues, students and
applicants, and we will not tolerate any discriminatory behaviour with respect to:
• Race, including skin colour, nationality, ethnic or national origin, accent,
culture, appearance and clothing
• Religion, spirituality or belief
• Sex
• Sexual orientation
• Gender identity and/or gender reassignment
• Marital or civil partnership status
• Pregnancy and maternity
• Age
• Disability, including neurodiversity and mental health
These characteristics align with the protected characteristics defined in the
Equalities Act 2010. We are also committed to supporting colleagues and
students who have minority characteristics or challenging circumstances that may
not be protected by law. These include:
• Refugees and forced migrants
• Carers
• Care-experienced people
• People with challenging socio-economic circumstances
We are committed to taking a people-centric, social model approach in our
practice. This means we recognise that disadvantage is not caused by
characteristics, but by societal constructs and constraints, and that we believe in
removing barriers to support people to thrive and flourish.
At Arden University, we are continually implementing strategies and procedures
to tackle the varying forms of discrimination which may occur. These align with
the following categories according to the Equality Act 2010:
• Direct discrimination – where a person is not treated equally due to any of
the characteristics listed above. This includes discrimination based on
association, where a person is treated less favourably because of their
association with another person who has a protected characteristic, and
Quality Assurance Document QA 25 Page 1 of 6
Version 8 – October 2025

discrimination based on perception, where a person is treated less
favourably because of a mistaken perception that they have a protected
characteristic.
• Indirect discrimination – where a requirement, situation or condition,
which is applied to all, has a potentially adverse effect on one or more
groups.
• Harassment – where someone is subjected to unwanted conduct on the
basis of one of the protected characteristics.
• Victimisation – where someone is treated less favourably due to action
taken against others under equality, diversity and inclusion legislation.
This policy sets out our commitment to EDI and to continually enhancing the
inclusiveness of our practice for colleagues and students at Arden University and
our international partners.
The University must comply with a new condition of registration coming into force
from August 1st 2025 regarding Sexual Misconduct and Harassment. As part of
that, we have created a new single source of information where you can find:
• any updated policy
• the new mechanism to report an alleged incident of Sexual Misconduct
and/or Harassment
• information on the support on offer to students, staff and visitors of the
University
• new training to raise awareness of how we are responding and expected
conduct on campus.
To find out more, visit our website which will be regularly updated and reviewed
by the relevant University teams. Please note, the reporting form is specifically
for Sexual Misconduct and Harassment. For details on how to report other types
of concerns, please refer to the Safeguarding and Complaints Policies.
2 IDENTITY AND RESPECT
At Arden University, we believe people should be able to bring their whole selves
to their work and/or study. We are proud to commit to respecting and valuing the
different identities that make up our diverse colleagues and student body. In
practice, this respect includes the commitments laid out in the following
paragraphs.
We commit to respecting the language and terminology people use to describe
themselves, i.e. in terms of disability, neurodiversity, race, ethnicity or other
characteristics or circumstances. We commit, as far as possible, to mirroring their
language, and to not applying our own labels to other people’s circumstances
(i.e., if a person describes themselves as a wheelchair user, we will not apply the
term ‘confined to a wheelchair’ or other outdated terms to them.)
We utilise inclusive language in our teaching materials, guidance and policy
documentation, as far as possible. We will make every effort to keep up to date
with changing terminology to avoid potentially offensive language. This does not
restrict lawful freedom of speech or academic freedom.
Quality Assurance Document QA 25 Page 2 of 6
Version 8 – October 2025

We commit to taking a granular approach to ethnicity and disability, in which we
recognise individual differences and do not treat people as part of a single
homogenous group.
We commit to supporting our trans and non-binary students and colleagues and
treating them with dignity and respect, according to the principle that trans rights
are human rights. We will make every effort to avoid using dead names, to use
people’s stated pronouns, and will work towards systems that support this. We
recognise this can involve a learning curve for people, and we promote a culture
of patience while people adopt this practice.
We will provide safe spaces that our colleagues and students may need, including
prayer rooms, gender-neutral bathroom facilities and space location help (using
maps or human support to help users with location challenges).
We respect our students’ and colleagues’ beliefs, including religious and
philosophical beliefs. We believe in and actively promote freedom of speech and
academic freedom; students and staff are free to engage in academic debate over
beliefs but never to the point where it harasses, discriminates against, or
threatens the dignity or safety of a person with protected characteristics (in
accordance with the Equality Act 2010). We recognise that human rights must be
balanced against each other; this means one person cannot claim free speech
protection to incite hatred against others or put them in danger.
We commit to taking developmental or disciplinary action when colleagues or
students intentionally violate these commitments in order to protect our inclusive
and supportive university culture.
3 ACCESSIBILITY AND REASONABLE ADJUSTMENTS
Arden University is committed to supporting disabled and neurodiverse students
and colleagues. We aim to make our courses, study experiences and work
experiences as accessible as we can at the design stage. We also commit to
making, wherever possible, reasonable adjustments to our operating procedures
to accommodate any needs students and colleagues may have, whilst maintaining
the integrity of our academic standards and quality of our qualifications.
Adjustments may be anticipatory or responsive. Anticipatory adjustments may
include, but are not limited to:
• Digital accessibility of our VLE and learning materials
• Transcripts and captions of media
• Trigger or content warnings on potentially distressing content
• Guidance and ongoing professional development and support for
colleagues around inclusive teaching and reasonable adjustments
Responsive reasonable adjustments will be made on an individual basis, based on
needs, academic rigour and precedent. They may include, but are not limited to:
• Special arrangements in examinations or assessments
• Extra time in examinations
• Alternative assessments or tasks
• Alternative formats available upon request
• Adjustments to classrooms and physical spaces
Quality Assurance Document QA 25 Page 3 of 6
Version 8 – October 2025

• Alternative formats of course materials, including enlargements and
changes to fonts
• Human (non-medical) support, such as notetakers and British Sign
Language interpreters
• Support in digital (distance and blended) learning through assistive
technologies, such as screen readers or magnification software
• Reasonable adjustments in interviews and to working conditions, as
agreed with stakeholders such as line managers, People Services and
Occupational Health Advisors
We encourage students and colleagues to disclose disabilities, neurodiversity or
mental health conditions or difficulties to the University as early as possible, so
that we can provide timely support. For students, our Wellbeing Services Team
will then endeavour to evaluate any needs the students may have and any
potential implications for their study. Where appropriate, evidence may be
required to support a request for special arrangements to be made.
In certain circumstances (i.e. where there is an urgent or severe need, or where
the circumstances of the case demand it) reasonable adjustments can be made if
a student has not disclosed a disability or engaged with the Wellbeing Services
team. Training will be provided for staff to ensure they feel confident knowing
when and how to make these reasonable adjustments (please review the QA81
Disability and Reasonable Adjustments Policy).
Complex requests, or requests for adjustments without precedent will be referred
to the EDI Referrals Panel for review and recommendation. They may also be
escalated to the Academic Board, or other bodies as appropriate, if they require a
policy decision to be made.
4 STUDENT AND COLLEAGUE EXPECTATIONS
At Arden University, we recognise that our colleagues and students have the right
to have certain expectations of us as their employer or higher education provider.
Similarly, we have the right to have expectations of them. These expectations are
laid out in the following sections.
4.1 Colleague expectations
Arden University is an equal opportunity employer and is fully committed to a
policy of treating all its employees and job applicants equally. Arden University
colleagues can expect us to avoid discrimination in all aspects of employment
including recruitment and selection, promotion, transfer, opportunities for
training, pay and benefits, other terms of employment, discipline, selection for
redundancy and dismissal. We will make reasonable adjustments to interviews
and standard working practices to overcome disability-related barriers. We will
regularly monitor the effects of selection decisions, pay practices and procedures
in order to assess whether equal opportunity and dignity at work are being
achieved, and will make changes to our practices where necessary. We also
operate colleague networks for diverse groups and our colleagues can expect us
to ensure those networks’ voices are heard in university governance committees.
Arden University will take all reasonable steps to provide a work environment in
which all employees are treated with respect and dignity and that is free of
harassment based upon an employee’s race, skin colour, ethnic origin,
Quality Assurance Document QA 25 Page 4 of 6
Version 8 – October 2025

nationality, national origin, religion or belief, sex, sexual orientation, gender
reassignment, age, marital or civil partnership status or disability. Arden
University will not condone any form of harassment, discrimination or bullying,
whether engaged in by employees or by outside third parties who do business
with the university, such as clients, customers, contractors and suppliers.
Arden University employees have a moral and contractual duty to co-operate to
ensure that this policy is effective in ensuring equal opportunities and in
preventing discrimination, harassment or bullying. Action will be taken under the
university’s staff disciplinary procedure against any employee who is found to
have committed an act of unlawful discrimination, harassment, bullying or
intimidation. Serious breaches of this policy will be treated as potential gross
misconduct and could render the employee liable to summary dismissal.
Employees can be held personally liable for any act of unlawful discrimination.
However, nothing in this policy should be interpreted to restrict lawful freedom of
speech or academic freedom.
All colleagues new to Arden University are required to complete mandatory online
modules on Equality, Diversity and Inclusion and Unconscious Bias. Further
training and development opportunities on EDI, accessibility and mental wellbeing
are available and are run regularly (at least quarterly.)
4.2 Student expectations
Arden University offers equality of access to all its programmes and encourages
the recruitment of students from the widest possible audience both nationally and
internationally in adherence with its widening access ambition. Our students can
expect us to ensure that diversity, inclusion and accessibility are embedded into
every aspect of the student learning journey, including:
• Enrolment
• Induction
• Student Support
• Teaching, curriculum and Academic Support
• Assessment
• Pastoral Support
• Achievement Reporting and Self-Assessment.
We commit to support this through:
• Marketing literature with diverse representation of different student
groups, produced for all programmes
• An admissions process which is sensitive and supportive to the needs of all
students
• A dedicated Wellbeing Services team who support students to disclose
disabilities, seek support for mental health, process safeguarding issues
and support students in hardship
• The creation of courses and materials in line with the Arden University
Excellence Framework for Inclusive Curriculum, to ensure all study
materials and assessment do not contain anything which could be
considered discriminatory or offensive to individual students or groups.
• A programme review process that monitors the curriculum, student
progress and achievement to ensure that programmes are equitable.
We expect our students, like our colleagues, to be supportive and inclusive of the
other members of Arden University staff and student community. Students must
not bully, harass, intimidate or discriminate against other students or colleagues
Quality Assurance Document QA 25 Page 5 of 6
Version 8 – October 2025

based on their race, skin colour, ethnic origin, nationality, national origin, religion
or belief, sex, sexual orientation, gender reassignment, age, marital or civil
partnership status or disability. Developmental or disciplinary action will be taken
when students are found to have committed an act of unlawful discrimination,
harassment, bullying or intimidation. However, nothing in this policy should be
interpreted to restrict lawful freedom of speech or academic freedom.
Statistical information regarding student equality and diversity will be provided to
monitor the equality of our provision. This includes enrolment data by equality
characteristics, as monitored by the Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA),
and student continuation, completion and progression data by age, gender,
disability status and ethnicity.
5 COMMITMENT TO ONGOING IMPROVEMENT
At Arden University, we recognise that EDI is a constantly evolving field, and we
continue to strive to improve. We recognise that we will make mistakes at times,
but we commit to a culture of lifelong learning and to adopting an evolving,
holistic view of EDI, which is human-centred and compassionate.
We commit to continually enhancing our processes and approaches, and to
working in partnership with our diverse students and colleagues. We will continue
to offer development opportunities for colleagues and students, to raise
awareness of EDI and equip colleagues and students with practical skills to be
inclusive in their approaches. We encourage students and colleagues to feel
confident in speaking out and raising awareness of any areas in which
improvement is needed.
We commit to promoting EDI, celebrating the unique characteristics of our
student and colleague communities, and promoting our good practice externally,
in order to encourage the higher education sector to be more inclusive.
Policy Name: Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Policy
Policy Reference: QA25
Approval Authority: Academic Framework, Regulation and Policy
Committee
Last Approved: October 2025
Responsible SMT Lead: Director of EDI
Responsible Department: Academic Office
Policy Contact: Kate Lister, Director of EDI
Review Frequency: 3 years
Quality Assurance Document QA 25 Page 6 of 6
Version 8 – October 2025