QUALITY ASSURANCE DOCUMENT QA 23: ACADEMIC INTEGRITY AND MISCONDUCT
Keywords: plagiarise plagiarising plagiarized plagiarize cheating collusion dissertation misconduct
1. Introduction
This policy and procedure applies to all students of the University and therefore all
taught programmes and modules offered at Undergraduate and Postgraduate levels. It is
also applicable to students undertaking an Arden University programme through a
collaborative or partnership provider.
1. The aim of this policy is to ensure that:
i. Cases of suspected academic misconduct are dealt with openly and fairly.
ii. Appropriate penalties and sanctions are imposed for proven cases of academic
misconduct.
iii. Academic Integrity is promoted across the University and issues relating to this
are responded to appropriately to minimise the risk of academic misconduct.
2. Academic Integrity
2. Academic integrity is about fairness and honesty in the assessment process and
mastering the art of scholarship. Scholarship involves researching, understanding and
building upon the works of others and requires that students give credit where it is
due and acknowledge the contributions of others to their own intellectual efforts.
Where a student does not act with Academic Integrity, their work may demonstrate
poor academic practice, or it may represent academic misconduct.
3. Academic Misconduct
3. Academic Misconduct is any action or attempted action that may result in creating
an unfair academic advantage for oneself or an unfair academic advantage or
disadvantage for any other member or members of the academic community.
4. Academic Misconduct includes cheating, attempts to cheat, plagiarism, self-
plagiarism, collusion, falsifying data, commissioning of assessment writing to a third-
party writing service (including artificial intelligence), and violation of research ethics.
It is wrong and unacceptable, not least because it is dishonest, and it undermines the
value of the qualification that students are pursuing.
5. Examples of academic misconduct are provided below. This list of examples is not
exhaustive and does not limit the general nature of the definition of academic
misconduct. Other actions may fall within the general definition of academic
misconduct.
i. Infringements of examination regulations, for example, but not limited to; the
introduction of prohibited material into the examination; copying from or any
communication with any other person during the examination that has not been
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 1 of 11
October 2024

authorised by an invigilator, the impersonation of an examination candidate or
allowing oneself to be impersonated.
ii. Plagiarism, which is the use without proper acknowledgement of another
person’s words and presenting it in an assessment as if they were one’s own.
Plagiarism includes copying from another student, copying from published work
(including online learning materials, lecturer notes, books, internet sites, journal
articles, case studies, computer code, artefacts, images etc.).
iii. Self-plagiarism, which is the reuse of previously submitted work from other
modules or programmes (not limited to Arden) and any other similar practice,
including the reuse and submission of the same piece of work for two or more
different purposes.
iv. Collusion, which includes work that is undertaken collaboratively by two or more
people and is submitted as if it were the work of a single person; the submission
of one student’s work as if it were the work of another student; where a student
makes their work available to another student to copy; where a student copies
another’s work with or without the other person’s knowledge. It should be noted
that in collusion cases, both or all parties can be at fault even if the collusion takes
place without the knowledge of the original author of the work. It is distinct from
contract cheating for the purpose of this policy as collusion does not depend on a
fee being paid for the work.
v. Contracting, paid or otherwise, of others to produce the work (ghost writing). This
includes the use of known essay writing services and/or other agencies and the
use of any other party including artificial intelligence in the production of some,
or all the work.
vi. Falsifying data, including but not limited to, fabricated authorisation letters,
making false claims to have carried out research, observations, surveys,
interviews, distorted research outcomes, fabricated participant consent or other
forms of data collection and analysis.
vii. Misconduct in relation to research, including but not limited to, failure to obtain
appropriate ethical approval for the research conducted.
viii. Deliberate attempts to disguise the content of an assessment, including but not
limited to, the use of presenting text as an image, or other means used to disguise
part or all the assessment.
ix. Deliberate misrepresentation of wordcount within assessments.
6. Allegations of suspected assessment misconduct identified prior to submission of
summative assessment will be considered in accordance with QA60 Student Disciplinary
Procedure.
7. The following examples of poor academic referencing are not considered to be
evidence of academic misconduct and would not normally require referral for
further investigation. However, it is expected that markers reflect poor academic
practice in the grade allocated and when providing feedback (see also point 13)
Vast majority work is students own but there are small sections of written work that
are unattributed and make no reference to other sources but have not been
identified by Turnitin as matching previously published work.
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 2 of 11
October 2024

Poor expression and structure and lack of clarity in the writing.
Reliance on a small number of sources but low similarity match in the Turnitin
report.
Failure to consistently apply standard referencing technique.
Significant use of direct quotations from sources that are acknowledged in the text
and reference list.
Some typographical or other errors in the reference list.
Submissions which have a high overall percentage match with previously published work on
Turnitin should not automatically be referred for further investigation. The nature of the
match should be investigated to see how it constructed.
4. Offence of Academic Misconduct
8. A student is guilty of academic misconduct if acting alone or with other(s) gains or
attempts to gain credit or advantage in an assessment by improper means:
i. A student commits the offence of academic misconduct, gaining advantage or
credit or attempting to gain advantage or credit for him/herself or another.
ii. The student’s intent in committing the actions which amount to academic
misconduct is immaterial and will not be considered by the Academic Misconduct
Panel when determining whether the student is guilty of academic misconduct.
iii. The student’s intent in committing the actions which amount to academic
misconduct will if relevant be considered by the Panel in determining appropriate
penalty or action.
9. Cases of academic misconduct are treated extremely seriously. Students found guilty of
committing an academic misconduct offence will be penalised. Penalties are detailed in
Section 27.
5. Reporting Suspicions of Academic Misconduct
10. Students are required to submit their assignments electronically via the online
submission portal. It is Arden University’s policy to systematically scan assessment
submissions received in this way by use of the Turnitin plagiarism detection system.
There is no set acceptable Turnitin score; work with lower Turnitin scores may still be
referred if there is any doubt over the originality of the work. In addition, markers and
examiners are expected to be vigilant in detecting academic misconduct in assessment.
11. For programmes delivered in languages other than English, alternative plagiarism
detection software or systems may be used.
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 3 of 11
October 2024

12. Students can submit a draft of their work to Turnitin in advance of the assessment
deadline and are strongly encouraged to use this function developmentally before
making their final submission.
13. Where an internal marker, external examiner, or any other individual involved in the
assessment of students suspects, during or after the assessment and marking process,
including following the ratification of grades and/or prior or following the award of a
qualification, that a student has committed academic misconduct which is not
considered to be a minor level offence as outlined in section 28, this must be referred
for further investigation with details of the evidence that gave rise to this suspicion.
14. Cases of poor academic practice are not considered as academic misconduct offences
and should be addressed by the marker within the written feedback, and marked in
accordance with normal procedures, taking into consideration lack of originality
within the grading.
15. In cases where it is suspected that the production of the assessment has been
commissioned to a third party, supporting evidence could include:
• meta-data captured from within the submitted document (for example, the
properties of a Word document may identify the author as being different
from the student)
• samples of the student’s normal writing style
• evidence of the submission to an essay mill
• evidence from Turnitin where applicable
• notes from a viva voce examination conducted as part of the evidence
collection process (see section 17)
In the case that a marker reports an allegation of academic misconduct as above, the
student’s work in question must nonetheless be marked and awarded a grade on its
own merit taking into account any lack of originality and produce feedback that takes
account of the work in its entirety, irrespective of the allegation. This grade and
feedback would stand in the case that a student is cleared of academic misconduct.
16. Invigilators suspecting academic misconduct in examinations will act in accordance with
the relevant examination regulations and will make a report of the allegation in the
invigilator’s report and append any supporting evidence to their report.
17. Allegations raised during the marking stage will be initially reviewed by an Academic
Integrity Officer to determine whether a formal allegation will be made against a
student.
6. Viva Voce Meetings
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 4 of 11
October 2024

18. Where there are concerns regarding the authenticity of work such as suspected
commissioning of the assessment (e.g., ghost writing or use of essay mills, use of AI to
produce work) or falsification of data, the student may be asked to attend a viva voce
meeting to demonstrate their authorship.
19. The date and time of the Viva Voce meeting will be provided along with full instructions
for attendance and details of what they may expect as part of the process. The student
may be accompanied by a friend, relative or student representative. If an agreeable
date for the meeting cannot be arranged with the student within 10 working days, or
if the student fails to attend without good cause or prior notification, the case will be
referred to the Academic Misconduct Panel and a decision may be made based on the
evidence provided.
20. The Viva Voce meeting will be conducted by an academic subject expert (normally the
person raising the concern) and one other academic staff member independent from
the allegation who will act as chair. The chair should ensure that the viva is conducted
in a collegiate manner and that the student is treated fairly. During the meeting,
students will be given the opportunity to explain their work and questions may be
posed in respect of sources, ideas and theories presented within the work. Minutes
of the meeting will be taken by the Quality nominee.
21. The Viva Voce meeting is not the point at which the outcome of the investigation is
decided but will be used to gather evidence to present as part of any formal allegation
and investigation by the Academic Misconduct Panel. Once the meeting is concluded,
if concerns remain, a formal allegation will be made and referred to the Academic
Misconduct Panel. The student will be issued with further instructions as detailed within
section 22.
7. Academic Misconduct Panel
22. All instances of alleged academic misconduct will be collated by a nominee of the
Quality team who will be responsible for convening an Academic Misconduct Panel to
hear and investigate the allegations and to determine any penalties to be applied. The
Academic Misconduct Panel will normally comprise the Quality nominee, who will act
as secretary and take minutes of the proceedings, and two academic staff members
including an Academic Integrity Officer who will act as Chair. Where deemed
appropriate, an independent person may be appointed as an additional member of the
Panel.
23. Students will be issued with individual letters detailing the nature of the allegation being
made against them and inviting them to provide a formal response either in writing, by
telephone or in person to the Academic Misconduct Panel. A link to the Academic
misconduct procedure will be included in the email. Letters will normally be issued at
least 7 days in advance of the scheduled meeting of the Academic Misconduct Panel.
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 5 of 11
October 2024

24. Students wishing to attend the Academic Misconduct Panel in person may be
accompanied by a friend, adviser or representative who may speak on their behalf. They
cannot be accompanied by a professional (e.g. solicitor or barrister) acting on their
behalf in a professional capacity.
25. Students will be required to inform the Quality Team via upresponses@arden.ac.uk
whether they intend to make a verbal response or provide a written response to the
allegation or not. Students who are being accompanied by a friend, adviser or
representative must inform the Quality nominee of the name of the person in writing
in advance of the meeting. Every reasonable attempt will be made to obtain a response
from the student and the Academic Misconduct Panel will not normally hear a case for
which no acknowledgement of the allegation has been received from the student, or
without the student being fully informed that their case will be heard without their
response. If, however, a student does not attend the meeting of the Academic
Misconduct Panel, having previously indicated that they would attend, and providing all
reasonable attempts have been made to contact the student, the meeting shall proceed
in their absence.
Cases of collusion will normally be heard separately, however students who choose to
attend the Academic Misconduct Panel meeting may request that their case be heard
jointly.
26. The terms of reference of the Academic Misconduct Panel are:
i. To consider the evidence on which the allegation of academic misconduct is based;
ii. To determine whether the allegation has been substantiated;
iii. Where a case has been substantiated, to determine the penalty or action to be
imposed;
iv. To record observations and outcomes that may be used to inform staff training,
assessment design, process and practice or any other outcome that would benefit
from further investigation and reporting.
27. The following procedures apply to meetings of the Academic Misconduct Panel:
i. The chair or other member of the Panel will present the case against the student
and the evidence on which the case is based.
ii. If the student is in attendance, in person or by telephone, the panel may question
the student during the presentation of evidence.
iii. Once the presentation of evidence is complete, all persons, excluding the panel
members, shall withdraw, and the committee shall consider whether the allegation
has been substantiated.
iv. If the panel finds that the case has been substantiated, it shall then consider the
penalty or action to be imposed.
v. If the panel finds that the case is not substantiated but the panel finds that the
infraction goes beyond poor references as outlined in paragraph 14, then
the panel can make a finding of poor academic practice and consider imposition
of an action.
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 6 of 11
October 2024

8. Actions and Penalties
28. The table on page 12 provides guidance on the course of action and application of
penalties for different levels of offences.
29. Where students present evidence of extenuating circumstances during the
investigation process, such evidence will not supersede the decision regarding academic
misconduct. However, in exceptional cases, if the Academic Misconduct Panel deems it
appropriate to take circumstances into account when determining the appropriate
course of action, these should be brought to the attention of the Academic Registrar
and Head of School for consideration.
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 7 of 11
October 2024

Category Examples Recommended Penalties
Moderate Majority of assessment is students’ own, but Formal warning that will be considered in any
the is a significant proportion that is not the subsequent offences
work of the student:
Completion of ASSIST and/ or referral
• Large sections of unoriginal content Academic Skills Tutor
copied form another source
• Large sections of poorly paraphrased Award mark of zero for assessment.
content Reassessment if permitted capped at pass
• Large sections matching to the mark
submission of another student which
suggests an inappropriate level of
sharing of work
Unauthorised use of significant proportions of
work previously submitted as part of another
assessment for which credit has been awarded
(self-plagiarism)
Major Majority of work is not the students own: Formal warning that will be considered in any
subsequent offences. Repeated major offence
• Majority of assessment copied from will be deemed as extremely serious offence.
another source
• Majority of work copied from another Completion of ASSIST and/ or referral
student Academic Skills Tutor
• Use of AI to produce large sections of
content
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 8 of 11
October 2024

• Falsifying data Award mark of zero for assessment.
Reassessment if permitted capped at pass
Ethical breaches mark
Extremely Serious Final warning (any further major or extremely
• Commissioning the writing of the serious offences will result in exclusion from
assessment to a third-party writing the University)
service
• Use of AI to produce assessment in its Permanent exclusion from the University (
entirety where it is a repeated major or extremely
• Impersonation in an examination or serious offence)
presentation
• Serious ethical breaches
• The use of unauthorised materials in
an examination
• Repeated major offence following
previously confirmed major offence
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 9 of 11
October 2024

30. Following the Academic Misconduct Panel, the following actions will be undertaken:
i. A letter will be issued to students notifying them of the outcome of the Academic
Misconduct Panel and informing them of any penalty or action that has been
imposed, if applicable.
ii. The Quality nominee will record outcomes on the student’s record and any
cancellation of grade will also be recorded.
iii. The outcomes of the Academic Misconduct Panel will be presented to the next
meeting of the Subject Assessment Board, where these outcomes will be formally
received and ratified.
iv. Where the penalty determined by the Academic Misconduct Panel is exclusion, the
student will be presented to the Progression and Award Board for formal
withdrawal. Grades and/or awards achieved prior to the exclusion will normally
stand unless there is clear and compelling evidence to demonstrate that credits
should be removed. In such cases, the University reserves the right to
retrospectively review previously ratified work.
v. The decision of the Academic Misconduct Panel is final and there shall be no further
discussion of the details of the case with the student following the Academic
Misconduct Panel meeting. The student does, however, have the right of appeal as
detailed in Section 30.
vi. Students that are issued with informal or a formal warning must complete the
university’s ASSIST – module. Access to all active modules may be suspended until
ASSIST has been successfully completed.
vii. Allegations of academic misconduct which involve fraud or a serious breach of
examination security and implicate the Head of Centre or senior management will
be reported to the Academic Registrar and will be investigated accordingly.
viii. Confirmed cases of Academic misconduct may be reported to professional bodies
where applicable.
9. Appeals
31. Students whose allegation of academic misconduct has been substantiated have the
right to appeal against the decision of the Academic Misconduct Panel. Student appeals
must be made in writing and in accordance with the QA 24 Academic Appeals policy.
Outcomes
• During the investigation of academic misconduct allegations, issues and
observations may arise that would benefit from further investigation or action.
These may impact on future academic practice, staff development or University
processes and procedures.
• Key themes will be discussed during the committee and summarised by the
secretary. The AIO will provide a report to the next available Course Committee
and action required at a programme level will be generated and captured within
the programme team’s Annual Rolling Action Plan.
An overarching report with a summary of outcomes and key themes arising will be
presented to the Learning, Teaching and Assessment Committee on a quarterly basis and
will form part of the annual report to Academic Board.
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 10 of 11
October 2024

Policy Name: Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Policy Reference: QA23
Approval Authority: Academic Framework, Regulation and Policy
Committee
Last Approved: October 2024 (effective from 23rd December
2024)
Responsible SMT Lead: Academic Registrar
Responsible Department: Academic Affairs
Policy Contact: Joanne Walker, Head of Quality
(jwalker@arden.ac.uk)
Review Frequency: 3 years
QA 23 Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
Version 9 Page 11 of 11
October 2024
